[[!summary chatGPT: Evopedia 0.4.2 has been released for Windows, featuring an experimental installer created using HM NIS EDIT and a built-in p2p torrent downloader for updates and downloads.]]
[[!meta date="2010-12-25 15:26"]]
[[!tag packagemanager usability windows]]
[[!series evopedia]]

[[!img media/evopedia.png size=150x style="float: right"]]

# evopedia 0.4.2 on windows

there is now a **official 0.4.2 release** and this obsoletes the zip-file based git (git, the version control system) build, which i released a few weeks ago. as a surprise for me, my own wiki posting, my manual for building evopedia on windows, didn't work. so i had to hack the Makefile manually as  '-lbz2' had to be removed.

in the windows build i've applied a patch, so that the network setting is 'enabled' by default (was set to 'auto' previously). the 'auto' setting does only make sense for the maemo platform, on the nokia n900 device, anyway.

# NSIS - Nullsoft installer

finally i experimented with the nullsoft installer, read some example scripts and gave up. then i thought why not **copy the nullsoft installer script** of my favourite project: **springrts.com. **altough i needed a few minutes to find the right file, i soon realized that the spring setup script was generated by a wizzard.... sounded exactly what i needed. 

so i discoveded [2]: **HM NIS EDIT: A Free NSIS Editor/IDE**

# HM NIS EDIT

it took me about 2minutes to create a experimental installer and i have to point out that **'HM NIS EDIT' is excellent software**. i like it very much because i hate to spent time in my virtualbox windows xp image as the fonts are very small and all the windows tools feel so wrong.

i needed abou 30minutes to create this nice installer. hope it works for everyone - please report back to me.


# the evopedia installer


so here are the files:
	
  * **you can find the installer evopedia-0.4.2-installer.exe at [3] **
  * the nsi source for generating the installer can be found at [4]
  * a md5 sum of the two files can be found at [5].

# how to install

**execute the installer, select the 'small' evopedia. wait for about 3minutes, until the download is complete. then experiment with it.**

to get an idea what dumps we have without installing evopedia, see [6]. there is however a nice **p2p torrent downloader integrated into evopedia 0.4.2**, so you don't have to do downloads/updates manually.


# how to uninstall


if you don't like evopedia you can:

  1. use the uninstaller (to save approx. 6mb)
  2. don't forget to remove the small evopedia (and maybe other evopedia archives you have downloaded) manually.


i doubt that i will add an automation for the second step to the uninstaller, so this must be done manually, even on futher releases.

# links

* [1] <http://nsis.sourceforge.net/Main_Page>
* [2] <http://hmne.sourceforge.net/index.php>
* [3] <http://lastlog.de/misc/evopedia-0.4.2-installer.exe>
* [4] <http://lastlog.de/misc/evopedia-0.4.2-installer.nsi>
* [5] <http://lastlog.de/misc/evopedia-0.4.2-installer.md5>
* [6] <http://evopedia.info/dumps/>
