[[!summary chatGPT: The author discusses their difficulties in using VirtualBox with 64-bit guests on their host OS and their attempts to fix it, eventually finding success with the x11-drivers/nvidia-drivers-256.35 driver. They also mention the various functions that are now working with this driver, but note that it may not be stable.]]
[[!meta date="2010-07-21 11:21"]]
[[!img media/.jpg alt="" style="float: right"]]
[[!tag gentoo linux technology usability]]

# motivation

i always wanted to use VirtualBox with 64bit guests. but this did not work for a very long time. i guess this has something to do with that Quadro FX 770M card.


    lspci
    01:00.0 VGA compatible controller: nVidia Corporation G96M [Quadro FX 770M] (rev a1)


so on which architecture is my host OS?

    arch
    x86_64

# what were the previous problems?


i've always experimented with the bios setting, on my hp bios this is called: "Virtualization Technology" and it can either be enabled or disabled. but for various versions of x11-drivers/nvidia it:



	
  * did not start X with an error message in /var/log/Xorg.0.log
  * crash the computer with a black screen (and more than average but constant fan noise)

however it was always able to use the xorg driver called 'nv' to use the system. only the proprietary nvidia module did not work as expected.

here is a list of driver versions i've experimented with (**which did NOT work**):

  * x11-drivers/nvidia-drivers-180.27
  * x11-drivers/nvidia-drivers-180.29
  * x11-drivers/nvidia-drivers-180.44
  * x11-drivers/nvidia-drivers-180.51
  * x11-drivers/nvidia-drivers-180.60
  * x11-drivers/nvidia-drivers-185.18.36
  * x11-drivers/nvidia-drivers-185.18.36-r1
  * x11-drivers/nvidia-drivers-190.42-r3
  * x11-drivers/nvidia-drivers-190.53
  * x11-drivers/nvidia-drivers-190.53-r1
  * x11-drivers/nvidia-drivers-195.36.24


# what did fix it?


installing **x11-drivers/nvidia-drivers-256.35** finally fixed it!


# what does work?

  * 3d game, so 3d acceleration support is there
  * 2d acceleration does seem to work as well
  * pm-suspend (hibernate-ram) seems to work as well
  * using VirtualBox with a 64 bit image (enabling System->Acceleration->Hardware Virtualization [x] Enable VT-X/AMD-V)
  * mode switch to consoles (alt+f1 to alt+f12) does work and i can see it actually (no black screen)


i hope this driver is somehow stable. currently it's hardmasked in gentoo.


# update: fr 23 jul

using **x11-drivers/nvidia-drivers-256.35** did break suspend's resume with several crashes. i've disabled VT in the bios and now i'm using the latest stable release.
